---
title: 5. Create sample topology
description: Use the File Observer to create some sample topology
sidebar_position: 5
---

## 5.1: Overview

This module focuses on the initial creation of topology within the Event
Manager. Topology adds enormous value to your deployment as it provides
visibility into your environment and brings it to-life. With topology in your
environment, you can:

- Visualise a seamless end-to-end view of your environment
- Create and view groups of resources that logically belong together
- Perform topology-based event correlation for events occurring within a group
  of related resources

The topology capability can ingest topology data from many different sources.
The multiple disparate pieces of topology can then be stitched together, where
it makes sense to do so, allowing you to see your end-to-end environment with
all the logical and physical connections represented.

![](images/end-to-end-topology.png)

At the time of writing, the Event Manager comes with 30 different Observers. 28
of these are designed to connect to specific types of end-point, such as
ServiceNow, Dynatrace, or VMware vCenter. Two of the Observers are generic ones:
the File Observer (for ingesting file-based topology data) and the REST Observer
(for ingesting topology data programmatically via an API).

:::note

A full list of the topology Observers are documented here:
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/nasm/1.1.14?topic=jobs-defining-observer-manually

:::

By the end of this module, you will have created two topology Observer jobs,
ingested two sets of topology data, and tied them together via a Merge Rule.

## 5.2: Create and copy two sample topology files to the File Observer pod

This first step involves the following tasks:

- Create two sample files with topology data in them
- Copy them to the File Observer pod

In a real-world scenario, it is likely that you would be using a number of
off-the-shelf Observers to get your topology data from your environment. It is
also likely however that you would also leverage the File or REST Observers
either to ingest data for which an off-the-shelf Observer doesn't exist, or to
manually create relationships between Resources in your topology for which there
is no import source. For example, you may wish to create connections between
resources to represent logical connections or dependencies that aren't included
in the data sets. In any case, this exercise will give you the skills to use the
File Observer, which will also equip you with a little more knowledge of what's
going on under the covers.

In this scenario, we will have one set of topology data that represents
**physical infrastructure**, and a second set of topology data that represents
some **applications** running on that physical infrastructure. An analogy to
this might be physical topology data ingested from an orchestrator, such as
OpenStack, and application data, coming from an application management tool,
such as AppDynamics.

Create a new file called infrastructure.txt with the following contents:

```sh title="infrastructure.txt"
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e","matchTokens":["379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e","router1"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"router1","entityTypes":["router"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","matchTokens":["9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","cpu01"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"cpu01","entityTypes":["cpu"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"222-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","matchTokens":["222-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","cpu02"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"cpu02","entityTypes":["cpu"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"7598a194-27a0-4d0b-9c49-cbc0070c99c9","matchTokens":["7598a194-27a0-4d0b-9c49-cbc0070c99c9","greatFireWallOfSecurity"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"greatFireWallOfSecurity","entityTypes":["firewall"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","matchTokens":["974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","computer1000"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"computer1000","entityTypes":["computer"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"5c6f968a-2006-4b43-96b5-dd53df6b0afb","matchTokens":["5c6f968a-2006-4b43-96b5-dd53df6b0afb","steve"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"steve","entityTypes":["person"]}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e","_edgeType":"connectedTo","_fromUniqueId":"974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807"}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"7598a194-27a0-4d0b-9c49-cbc0070c99c9","_edgeType":"uses","_fromUniqueId":"379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e"}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","_edgeType":"uses","_fromUniqueId":"5c6f968a-2006-4b43-96b5-dd53df6b0afb"}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","_edgeType":"contains","_fromUniqueId":"974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807"}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"222-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","_edgeType":"contains","_fromUniqueId":"974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807"}
```

This JSON format is the type accepted by the File Observer, and contains
topology directives, one per line. A line that begins with a **V** represents a
"Vertex" (or Resource in UI terms). A line that begins with an **E** represents
an "Edge" (or Relationship in UI terms).

:::note

Other format information can be found here:
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/nasm/1.1.14?topic=manually-defining-file-observer-jobs

:::

:::note

Some notes about the Vertex (Resource) properties follow:

- \_operation: A value of "InsertReplace" means that this Resource will be
  inserted into the topology if it does not already exist, and replace the
  current one if it does.

- uniqueId: This must be a globally unique identifier for the Resource. The
  off-the-shelf Observers will ensure uniqueness automatically. When using the
  File Observer, care must be taken to ensure uniqueness, otherwise you may
  inadvertently overwrite existing Resources with new ones.

- matchTokens: These values (comma separated list) are used to match the
  Resource against the incoming event stream, specifically against the Node and
  NodeAlias fields. Where there is a match, the event will be associated with
  the Resource and be visible from the topology view.

- tags: Tags can be handy to group Resources together, or for searching across
  resources that share a common tag. A resource can have multiple tags and
  represents a kind of group membership. One way that topology-based event
  correlation is across events that share a common tag. For example, you might
  tag all Resources that run an Oracle database with: "App:Oracle". Then you
  could create a tag-based correlation group template based on that tag.

- name: This is the primary identity of the Resource, and would normally be its
  most recognisable and human-readable name. The name attribute is normally the
  one shown in the topology viewer against a Resource.

- entityTypes: This defines what type of Resource is being created - for
  example: a computer or a database - and will also dictate which icon it will
  use in the topology view. A resource can have multiple values in the
  entityTypes field, although normally it would just have one entry.

:::

:::note

Some notes about the Edge (Relationship) properties follow:

- \_fromUniqueId and \_toUniqueId: These parameters represent the start and end
  points for the Relationship - ie. which two Resources is it connecting. The
  values they have refer to the uniqueId parameters of the Vertex objects - ie.
  the Resources.

- \_edgeType: This parameter specifies the type of Relationship this relates to.
  For example, is it indicating a "uses" type of relationship, or a "contains"
  type?

A list of default Edge types (for the parameter \_edgeType) is documented here:
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/nasm/1.1.14?topic=reference-edge-types

:::

Create a second new file called application.txt with the following contents:

```sh title="application.txt"
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"111-379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e","matchTokens":["111-379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e","billing"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"billing","entityTypes":["application"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"111-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","matchTokens":["111-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453","webserver"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"webserver","entityTypes":["application"]}
V:{"_operation":"InsertReplace","uniqueId":"111-974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","matchTokens":["111-974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","computer1000"],"tags":["WAIOpsDemo"],"name":"computer1000","entityTypes":["computer"]}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"111-974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","_edgeType":"runsOn","_fromUniqueId":"111-379177a8-0a6a-4068-817c-d6d6e870437e"}
E:{"_toUniqueId":"111-974d1788-1312-4151-8a62-73fa1854e807","_edgeType":"runsOn","_fromUniqueId":"111-9c1f90e0-7dc4-40d8-8721-40ea2f3af453"}
```

## 5.3: Create two File Observer jobs

Log into the Event Manager UI, then navigate to: **Administration → Topology
Configuration → Observer jobs → Configure**

:::info

If you can't find `Topology Configuration` option from the UI, please ensure you
have enable the roles in
[2.7 Locate your login details and log in to Watson for AIOps Event Manager](http://localhost:3000/waiops-tech-jam/labs/watson-aiops/installation/#27-locate-your-login-details-and-log-in-to-watson-for-aiops-event-manager)

:::

Click on Add a new job and then choose File → Configure to create a new File
Observer job.

Input a label to call your new job - eg. Infrastructure - and upload files that
you created in step 5.2 - ie. infrastructure.txt and click Save:

![](images/infrajob.png)

:::note

The Provider will be automatically populated when you click Save.

:::

Repeat the process by creating a second File Observer job for the
applications.txt file.

Each job will run the moment it is saved. After you have done this, your
Observer jobs screen should look like the following:

![](images/observers.png)

You can verify your jobs ran successfully by first seeing the green Ready light
on your job (above), and second by searching the topology for your newly added
resources.

Choose Resource management from the left menu and search for WAIOpsDemo, which
is the tag that all of your Resources in both your files were tagged with. You
should see nine results come back under the Resources tab:

![](images/resources.png)

:::note

There are two resources in the list called "computer1000". One is from the
topology segment ingested from the infrastructure.txt file and the other one is
from the topology segment ingested from the application.txt file. We will be
merging these two Resources together shortly, via a Merge Rule.

:::

Click on **router1** and it will open the topology view. Increase the number of
hops to 2 and click **Render** and you should see something like the following:

![](images/router.png)

You can click Back on your browser window and click on one of the other
Resources ingested via the Applications job - eg. billing. You will see a
representation of the topology segment created by ingesting that file.

You are now ready to perform the final step, that being to create a Merge Rule
to tie the two topology segments together via the common resource.

## 5.4: Create a Merge Rule to tie the topology together

This final step is where the topology data coming from the application topology
source is mapped onto the topology data coming from the infrastructure
orchestration topology source. In our hypothetical scenario, we know we have
Resources of type "computer" in both sets of topology, and we know that they
relate to the same servers. Corresponding instances across the two data sets are
also labelled consistently and correctly, meaning that identifying the same
Resource across the two data sets is possible.

In our case, we have a Resource called "computer1000" represented in our
infrastructure topology data as well as in our application data. Our goal is to
merge the two sets of topology together so that we can both visualise what
applications are running on our servers, and more importantly, correlate
hardware alarms with application alarms, something that is not possible
otherwise. Note that the rule is created in a generic way so that if there were
any other computers included in our two data sets, they too would be merged
together automatically, so long as they met the criteria set out in the rule.

Navigate to **Administration → Topology Configuration -> Rules** and click on
New to create a new Merge Rule.

Use the following to create your new Merge Rule:

- **Rule name:** Give your rule a name - eg: **InfrastructureApplications**

- Set **Status** to **Enabled**

- **Tokens**: The tokens refer to the parameters in your Resources that will be
  compared. In our case, the parameter that stores the computer name is called
  "name" in both sets of data, so we just need one token entry here called
  **name** therefore. If the parameters were named different things, you could
  simply add both of the parameter names here.

- Expand the **Conditions** drop-down.

- **Observers**: Add **File** to the list of Observers this rule should apply
  to. Since both job types are of type File, this is all that is needed in this
  case. Normally you would add all the Observer types that apply to your
  mapping. If this section was left empty, it would try to apply this rule to
  topology data coming from all Observer types.

- **Providers**: Add both of your jobs to the list - ie.
  **FILE.OBSERVER:infrastructure.txt** and **FILE.OBSERVER:application.txt**.
  This specifies that this rule should only apply to these particular jobs. If
  this section was left empty, it would try to apply this rule to topology data
  coming from all jobs specified in the Observers list above.

- **Resource types**: Add the Resource types that this rule should apply to -
  ie. **computer**. If this section was left empty, it would try to apply this
  rule to all Resource types in the Observers list and Providers list above.

- The **Token filter mode** and **Token** filters sections allow you to refine
  your rule mapping even further, by allowing you to specify regular expressions
  to either include or exclude the set of Resources from the rule. In this case,
  we will leave both of these sections blank.

:::note

It is good practice to specify an appropriate set of Conditions for your rules,
to ensure they only get applied to things they're meant to.

:::

When finished creating your new Merge Rule, click Save and return to the
Observer jobs page: Administration → Topology Configuration → Observer jobs.

Click on the Run (Play button icon) to run your two jobs again. The data will be
reprocessed in light of the new rule information, and any Resources that match
the rule will have the merge operation made against them.

:::info

The merge will not happen unless the affected jobs are re-run.

:::

To verify the merge was successful, navigate back to Resource management from
the left menu, but this time search for **computer1000**. This time you will see
just one instance in the list of Resources called computer1000 whereas before
you would have seen two. Click on **computer1000**, change the hop view to **2**
and click **Render**. You should see something like the following, showing the
combined topology segments:

![](images/computer.png)

The Resource computer1000 is only shown once in the topology, but remains
connected to all the resources it was connected to in both sets of topology
data, prior to the merge. The Merge Rule has effectively merged the two sets of
topology together, by merging the common Resources, according to the rule that
we defined.

You have now completed this module and are ready for next module "Configure
topology templates".

:::note

[Reference Blog](https://community.ibm.com/community/user/aiops/blogs/zane-bray1/2022/04/25/getting-started-with-watson-aiops-event-manager-47)

:::
